# Rightly Dividing The Word of Truth

A Collection of One Dozen Editorials Recently Published In ZION'S ADVOCATE and MESSENGER OF TRUTH also an APPENDIX Containing Other Articles and Answers to Questions

## BY R. H. PITTMAN, EDITOR

Elder Harold Hunt  
P O Box 5352  
Maryville TN 37802

### DEDICATION

To MY Friends who read with pleasure these editorials as they appeared in the columns of the ADVOCATE and MESSENGER, and expressed a desire to see them published in this form, in this little book

_Lovingly Dedicated_

and it is the author's wish that a further perusal may give you [and every reader], both profit and pleasure; and that God may bless it to the upbuilding of His cause, the edifying and unifying of His people, and to the glorifying of His precious name.

R.H. Pittman  
Luray, VA, November 1922  
Second Edition  
September, 1923

Luray, Va., November 1, 1922.

# Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth

### EDITORIAL No. 1

## Calling and Qualifying Ministers

Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. (2 Tim. 2-15).

Thus wrote the Apostle Paul to a younger preacher. It was needful that the younger preacher be instructed along the line of preaching else Paul would not have thus taught him. The gift of preaching is from the Lord, but the one receiving that gift can improve it by study.

God calls and qualifies His ministers, but not in the sense that there is nothing for the preacher to do. I do not read where God preaches through the preacher. If God did the preaching it would always be the truth. God cannot lie. The best of men can, and sometimes do. If God did the preaching, it would not be imperfectly done. It would be perfectly expressed (for He is perfect) ; and in harmony with all other truth (for He is not the author of confusion).

God calls His servants by His Spirit. There is that divine influence in their heart; that love for the cause of truth; that desire to defend it; that impelling faith that leads towards a life of usefulness to others and glory to God. There is that beauty in the scripture never seen before; 

that hunger and thirst for more knowledge; that rushing in on the mind of light and liberty, in the field of truth, sometime in the busy hours of day—sometime in the quiet slumbers at night amid dreams and visions. Only the God called minister can understand this. And is it not also true that the God called minister is the one—and the only one—who feels a heavy responsibility to work in the Master's vineyard, and woe if he does not do so, yet at the same time realizing his inability and unworthiness for such a work? 

And right here is an important test. There are thousands of preachers who seem to have forgotten the preparation that must come from God. They look to man for preparation. The schools of men are sought; the god of human wisdom is worshiped. And they heap to themselves teachers having itching ears. They appear to believe it is all of man. They dare not preach without time to prepare the sermon. It must be cut and dried. And their faith seems to be more in their Notes than in God. Primitive Baptist preachers look upon such as manifesting a lack of faith in God. And it is. 

But is there not danger of some Primitive preachers going to the other extreme? In charging others with lack of faith, let us not presume too much upon God. Let no one think God is going to do all the work. Man is His servant. The servant is to labor and to feel his 

responsibility in how he labors—how well he does the work. A preacher who says his preaching is the Lord preaching through him, is presuming too much. He is an extremist. Sometimes the church, for its own good and God's glory, has to exclude such men. And when this is done, no right thinking man—no Bible Baptist for one moment concludes such church took action against the Lord. Such action is against the man. A preacher that boasts that God does it all, and he does nothing is worth nothing to the church. Such an extreme is fatalism, or to express it more plainly, do-nothing-ism. And it is as dangerous as Arminianism, or do-all-ism.

Now upon this subject—the subject of what the preacher should do and what he should teach people to do, I desire to present some thoughts for Primitive Baptists to consider. The subject is a comprehensive one and I shall not undertake to exhaust it. I could not if I tried. My ability is too limited and my time too brief. But I feel it is of great importance to the household of faith. "Like priest, like people," is a true proverb. The sheep will follow their shepherd, certainly to a great degree. Every division can be traced to some leader of the people. Sheep without a shepherd are in a pitiful condition, but not more so than when following an unsound and unfaithful shepherd. The prophet Isaiah complaining of the people turning from the Lord said, "For the leaders of this people caused them to err; and they that are led of 

them are destroyed," (Isa. 9: 16). Leaders often cause people to go in error. How important then it is that our preachers take heed to themselves and to the doctrine they preach. Paul at another time writing to Timothy said to him, "Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them; for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee. "1 Tim. 4: 16). Let us try to do this with honesty of purpose and sincerity of heart.

Study to show thyself approved unto God:—The minster then is to study. He is not told to go to the schools of men to learn how to preach. And there is not one example in all the word of God where it can be shown that one called to serve Him as prophet, apostle, or preacher was ever directed by divine inspiration to the schools of men to be prepared for the work. Therefore, Primitive Baptists do not undertake to maintain, nor do they patronize Theological schools. But because they have no such schools for the purpose of preparing men for the work of the Ministry is no evidence that they are advocates of an ignorant ministry, else such charge is equally applicable to God's servants whose lives we find recorded in the Bible. 

Nor is it any proof that the ministry of the Primitive Baptist church do not study. As a rule they are a studious body of men, and they should be. And I conclude it is 

also safe to say that they are as well versed in the Holy Scripture as the college taught ministry. This is their text book. They want "a thus saith the Lord" for what they preach and practice. This Book of God should be searched diligently and prayerfully. It is God's revealed will to man—a, lamp to our feet, a guide to us through life, and a comfort to us in death. And then, too, there is the Book of Nature ever open to the disciple of the Lord. And on its every page is to be seen the handiwork of God. From the tiniest insect that floats in the breeze to the tallest mountain with its snow capped peaks, God, the creator of all things is pointed to, and as the work of his hand, seem ever praising him. 

And also from the Book of Experience, are learned many lessons that can be learned in no other school. And lessons once learned in this school are not soon forgotten. And thus the sources of information are within, and without, and all around, and when being led and taught by the Great Teacher, even ignorant men, are made able ministers of the New Testament. Not that God in His word justifies any to put a premium on ignorance. Wisdom is to be desired, and sought after. Yet God calls not many wise men, not many noble. Some few of great worldly wisdom are called. Such were Moses and Paul. In God's providence Moses was raised up in the King's palace and trained in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. These Egyptians educated the man who broke the yoke of bondage from the neck of the Israelites which finally led to the destruction of Pharaoh and his hosts. 

Paul was educated by the Pharisees and then used by God to expose and tear down Phariseeism. When God needs a man of great human wisdom, He knows where to find him and how to use him. But all this justifies no minister in a life of self-satisfaction and apathy. Instead of boasting of either education or illiteracy, let us study to show ourselves approved unto God. True, Jesus told His Apostles (Mat. 10: 19) to "take no thought how or what ye shall say", but that was in case they were brought before governors and kings to be tried and persecuted for the truth they were preaching. He was not considering their service in a general way. They were to be fishers of men, feeders of sheep, sowers of seed,— "in the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand,"— labor in the Master's Kingdom with all due care and diligence.

Approved unto God:— The minister is not to seek to displease men, yet it is not his business to study to please them. "Speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all gentleness to all men." One can be firm for the truth and yet not be rude. Speak the truth in love. The great influence of kindness, forbearance and patience, seasoned with love, can never be estimated. The minister is to be as wise as serpents and as harmless as doves. To be like a serpent in wisdom and a dove in harmlessness, is indeed a wonderful gift. 

Such a gift can win souls. Mind you, win souls, not save souls. Win them from the ways of error to that of truth, win them to the cause of righteousness; enlist them in the service of the Master. "The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth souls is wise," (Prov, 12:30). But it is God-who has called him into the service and who sustains him there. Therefore the approval of God is above every thing else, is to be sought. To study to please men is an evidence that such an one is not a servant of Christ. It is a danger signal to see a preacher courting the popularity of the world, preaching and practicing anything that pleases the world. "Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you." Thus spoke Jesus to His ministers, (Luke 6: 26). He also said in the same chapter, "Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake." The true minister may expect such treatment. But "rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is your reward in heaven." He is to preach as a dying man to a dying people. 

Tell them the truth though they receive it not, and like Paul say, "Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved." (Rom. 10: 1). 

Preach the Gospel openly and freely with all sincerity, commending yourselves to God, and to every man's conscience, leaving the result to the Righteous Judge of all things.

A workman that needeth not be ashamed:— He that desireth the office of a Bishop, or Elder, desireth a good thing. There is no higher profession in the world than to be a true servant of God. The world does not so esteem it. But the judgment of the world is not the best judgment. Noah was a preacher of righteousness, but very unpopular with the world. Some wit once said "Noah must have been an Old Baptist Preacher for he hammered on that Old Ark a hundred and twenty years, preaching righteousness all the time, and didn't save but eight souls." Well, the eight souls saved in the Ark were all that were saved when destruction came. And in Jesus, the Ark of Safety, will be saved all that shall ever be saved eternally when the final test comes.

Had you not rather have been with Noah, unpopular though he was, than with the popular world on the outside, when the waters covered the earth? If one is right, there is nothing to be ashamed of. Let the vain, giddy world laugh and mock. Let us choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. God's word is right, and he will save his heart's delight. And though the church in 

the world is a sect every where spoken against, but "ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praise of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light," (1 Pet. 2: 9) Preaching Jesus is a work, and a good work; and those that perform it aright are worthy of honor and esteem.

And not only is it honorable, but difficult. It requires industry, diligence, and application. A lazy man can not make a useful minister. Nor can the most industrious and talented succeed without the directing and sustaining grace of God. They are laborers together with God, and laborers in His vineyard. And those who are faithful and sincere need not be ashamed even though their work may not apparently be blessed as the work of others. If true to God, they have nothing to be ashamed of. If they teach false doctrines and lead in false practices; if they are slothful, negligent and careless ; if their lives are not moral, upright and honest, then they have much to be ashamed of. But let no minister be ashamed of the Gospel of Truth, the good news of salvation alone through the merit— the blood and righteousness of Christ Jesus. 

This system of salvation is a divine one. God is its Author, Jesus its Executor, the Holy Spirit its Finisher. And not one heir of promise shall be left out; all of His children among all the races of men in all the world, and for all time, shall be safely housed in eternal glory.

And "blessed are your eyes for they see,"— "blessed are your ears for they hear," and blessed and favored is that workman in the Lord's vineyard who handles not the word of God deceitfully but who preaches Jesus "the way, the truth, and the life" all the time, as the means, and the only means, that can purge our sins, purify our conscience, cleans us from guilt, redeem us to God, and fit us for heaven. Such a workman needeth not be ashamed.

### EDITORIAL No. 2

## Not Truth, But the Word of Truth Divided

In a previous article I commented in a brief way on the subject matter in this verse, except the last clause. To this last clause I purpose to give more time, study and prayer. It is, I feel, of great importance to our people at this time. And I trust that what I may publish will be blessed of God to the glory of His name and the good of His people.

RIGHTLY DIVIDING THE WORD OF TRUTH:— It is not TRUTH, but the WORD OF TRUTH, that should be divided. The word of truth, under consideration, is the scripture,— the Old and New Testament. And in looking up the word TRUTH, I was astonished to find this word used the exact number of times in each of the Testaments. ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN TIMES the word TRUTH is found in the Old Scriptures, and ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN TIMES it is found in the New; a total of two hundred and thirty-four times in our Bible,— the King James version. Is this not remarkable? The 39 Books of the Old Testament were written in Hebrew,— some of them centuries before Christ;— the 27 Books of the New Testament were written in Greek in the first century of the Christian era, and each division of the 66 Books containing the word Truth an equal number of times. Does it not look as if INSPIRATION rightly divided the word of truth in the Old and the New Testaments, giving to each 

dispensation an equal portion? Does it not look like the Spirit of God directed this matter? Will the serious minded person contend that this only happened so? In the Old Testament there are 607,207 words; in the New Testament, 179,476. And yet in each of these number of words, the word truth, appears an equal number of times. 

To my mind this is another evidence that "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works."

TRUTH ! WHAT IS TRUTH? Pilate asked Jesus this question but did not stay to get an answer. To Pilate Jesus said, "To this end was I born in the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth My voice."

Pilate said unto Him, "What is truth?" And when he had said this he went out again unto the Jews, and said unto them, I find in Him no fault at all." (John 18: 37-38). There are many Pilates in the world today, asking, What is truth? but not really caring for an answer. They have their self-appointed opinion and do not want to be removed from it. And when you convince one such against his will, he is of the same opinion still. Maybe Solomon had in mind such when he said, "Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him." (Prov. 26:12) 

We are admonished by the Apostle Paul to "Be not wise in your own conceits." "Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise, For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God."

Webster tells us that TRUTH is fidelity; constancy; steadfastness; faithfulness; sincerity; genuineness; conformity to fact or reality; exact accordance with that which is, or has been, or shall be. Truth cannot be destroyed for God is the God of truth. Coleridge said, "Whispering tongues can poison truth" but it cannot kill it. Bryant said,

> "Truth crushed to earth shall rise again, 
> The eternal years of God are hers. 
> But Error, wounded, writhes in pain, 
> And dies among his worshipers."

"Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." And Christ said of himself, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." And in his prayer for his people recorded in John's Gospel, seventeenth chapter, we find he said, "Sanctify them through thy truth ; thy word is truth." And it is this word of truth that we want to carefully examine.  

> "The worth of truth no tongue can tell,
> 'Twill do to buy, but not to sell."

Francis Bacon said, "The proper inquiry after truth, which is the wooing of it; the knowledge of truth, which is the presence of it; and the belief of truth, which is the enjoying of it, is the sovereign good of human nature. 

The first creature of God, in the works of the days, was the light of the senses; the last was the light of reason; and His Sabbath work, ever since, is the illumination of His Spirit. First, He breathed light upon the face of matter; then He breathed light into the face of man ; and still He breathed and inspired light into the face of His chosen. Certainly it is heaven upon earth to have a man's mind move in charity, rest in providence, and turn upon the poles of truth."

Eld. Hassell, in an article published in the Gospel Messenger some years ago, in showing how little the wisest of men really know, said, "But blessed be the name of the God of Israel, His people, taught by Him, know that He is a God of truth (Psalm 31:5), and that His Son Jesus Christ is the perfect incarnation of essential and eternal truth (John 1: 14-17), and that His Spirit is the Spirit of truth (John 14: 17), and that His word is the holy and everlasting truth (John 17:17) upon whose declarations and promises they may securely rest their hope for salvation for time and eternity. Yet no man, nor do all men together, understand the written word of God in all its depth and fullness, and seeking to understand it we are, like others, (2 Tim. 2: 1519: Jas. 5: 19) liable to err. Among the leading causes of error are one-sidedness, partiality, prejudice, passion, inattention, haste, sloth, forgetfulness, imagination, hope, fear. self-love, pugnacity, limitation of our faculties, infinitude of truth, imperfection and ambiguity of language, and consequent logomachy, or mere wrangling about words."

Note the leading causes of error as stated by Eld. Hassell. And has he not well stated the causes? And do you note that not one of these several causes of error, which lead to strife and division, is a fruit of the Spirit? The Spirit of God produce no such fruit," but the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. 

“Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ." "Be not deceived ; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." Some wrest the scriptures to their own destruction. They read in them more than is clearly taught. They refuse to see and teach the plain truths expressed therein. They maximize one set of scriptures and minimize other scriptures equally as important. And the Apostle Peter warns against this when he said, "Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." Peter taught that there is a growth in grace and knowledge. 

Now growth is an effect.  The cause is life and proper nourishment. God is the giver of life and the furnisher of nourishment. Ought we not seek to wisely apply the nourishment. Do not wise parents seek to properly apply nourishment to their children that they may grow and develop? Should not the under-shepherd be careful how he feeds the flock of God? Many of God's children, "as new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby." And many need the strong meat of the gospel that they may grow strong. Then what better pasture could the sheep of the Lord be led for their peace, happiness and growth, than into the scriptures of God's truth, rightly divided, giving each his portion in due season? Let us carefully and prayerfully study this division.
DIVIDE : This does not mean to rend and tear,— to add to, or take from. The word of truth is perfect in every essential. It is a thorough furnisher for all good works. To tear and rend it shows enmity to its precepts and examples. To add to, or take from, shows insubordination and opposition to its authority and demands. Nor should it be adulterated with error. The Bible says what it means and means what it says. We cannot understand all about it, but the way of holiness is sufficiently plain that God's children, "the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein." (Isa. 35:8). The true minister realizes the responsibility and sacredness of handling the word of truth. He wants to distribute the food it contains to the babes in Christ, and to grown Christians, according to their capacities, and suitable to their cases and circumstances. He does not want to pervert, and wrest, and poison this pure fountain. He wants to point out the truth in it, show unto men the way of salvation, and plainly and faithfully preach the gospel contained in it. He desires to declare the whole counsel of God, and keep back nothing that is profitable.

Nothing is more clearly taught in the Bible than the sovereignty of God and the responsibility of man. And yet these cardinal principles cannot, by finite man, be fully reconciled. The old London Confession of Faith, and hundreds of other confessions published by Baptists and Protestants, have endeavored to reconcile these two aspects of eternal truth.

It is a scriptural fact that God permits sin, punishes for sin, and over-rules it for His own glory and His peoples' good. God is an absolute, infinite and eternal sovereign. He "works all things after the counsel of His own will." But He does not tempt, much less compel His creatures to sin. 

And Elder Hassell has well said "the idea that, if God permits His creatures to sin when He might prevent them, He is just as responsible for their sins as if He compelled them to sin, and is as guilty as His sinning creature, is a blasphemous sophistry in which we allow Satan to entangle us, and ignores the radical distinction between the creature and the Creator-the creature being made by the Creator, and being necessarily placed under law by the Creator, and justly accountable to his Creator for his disobedience; while the Creator is not justly obliged to sink His voluntary and rational creatures to the level of inanimate and insensate matter, to reduce them to mere machines, and compel them to obey His laws, but may justly leave them to obey or disobey, and justly punish them for their disobedience." 

Now if we, in the study of the word of God, keep in mind these two view points of the relationship between God and man, the harmony of all scripture will be more clearly seen. If we be moved from this position we shall either go into Arminianism on the one hand, or Fatalism on the. other. Both are dangerous. Broadly speaking, Arminianism robs God of glory in the salvation of sinners; Fatalism charges God with the sin of sinners. 

The one makes too much of obedience; the other denies obedience altogether, but says all things are appointed, necessary, inevitable. One system teaches that Heaven is gained by obedience; the other system teaches that nothing is gained by obedience. Both are wrong. Our salvation from sin is alone the work of the Tri-une God. Our salvation from error; from false ways and false doctrines; from immorality, disgrace and dishonor as God's children, is in obedience,— not in disobedience to God's law. 

Our obedience is not independent of the Spirit, but is a fruit of the Spirit working in us. "Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit," says Jesus. He also tells us to "strive to enter in at the strait gate." And the psalmist prays, "So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom."

### EDITORIAL No. 3 

## Salvation From Sin, Salvation From Error, Etc.

In my last article I said:—Our salvation from sin is alone the work of the Tri-une God. Our salvation from error; from false ways and from false doctrines; from immorality, disgrace and dishonor as God's children, is in obedience, not in disobedience of God's law. I also took pains to say that: Obedience is not independent of the spirit, but is a fruit of the Spirit working in us. Then I quoted the following language of Jesus, "Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit."

By "Salvation from sin," I mean from the nature and the effects of sin. Our parents in the Garden of Eden were made good and upright. God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness." This was done. From the hand of God man was sinless. But it was not long before he was tempted to sin, to disobey God. This he did. And the sin man first committed was not ordered of God, but forbidden by Him. And so no sin is ever ordered by the Lord, but always forbidden. Nor did God tempt our first parents to sin. They were tempted of the devil. God tempts no man to sin. In sinning, ignorantly or with knowledge, they involved themselves and their posterity in the transgression. "The wages of sin is death," and death hath passed upon all men for all have sinned. 

Then, how shall man be saved from sin? There is but one way. There is no need for but one way. Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." The Angel said of the birth of Jesus, "His name shall be called Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins." He came in the world for this purpose. He came to live as they should live,—to suffer as they deserve to suffer, and to die that they might be saved from eternal death, or banishment from God's presence. The prophet Isaiah said of Him long before His advent into the world, "But He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: and by His stripes we are healed." This same prophet also saw the victorious end of his suffering and said," He shall see the travail of His soul, and shall be satisfied; by His knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for He shall bear their iniquities." 

And Paul said of Him, "When He had by Himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1-3). Paul in Heb. 5-9 also said, "And being made perfect, He became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey Him." And all Primitive Baptists contend that this salvation from sin, and from the effects of it, and from the death ,of it, can be accomplished alone through the sufferings, death, and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. And they all contend that this was accomplished once for all, that when Jesus, on the cross, said, "It is finished," that He was speaking of His work, for "He was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification. (Rom. 4-25). And no Primitive Baptist contends that man has anything to do with this work. But on the contrary they all deny that it is by the works of men, in whole. or in part. Man must be born again. "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. (John 3-3). And again, "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. (John 3-7). The new birth is an absolute necessity. To see heaven and enter therein one must be born from above. 

Yet, nowhere in all the word of God is it made the duty of man to be born again. No where in God's word is he exhorted to be born again. Why is this? Why is man not exhorted to be born again? Why is it not made his duty to be born again? Is it not because he is entirely passive in regeneration, entirely helpless? That which is born, whatever the creature may be, is passively born. That is, there are no duties to be performed by things unborn in order to be born. This is clearly understood in the natural kingdom; it is as clearly taught in the spiritual kingdom. 

Paul said, speaking to the Ephesian brethren, "You hath he quickened." God did the quickening. He is the life giver, the source of all life. "For the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom He will. (John 5-21). "It is the Spirit that quickeneth: the flesh profiteth nothing." (John 6-63). 


These texts prove conclusively and without the shadow of a doubt that the salvation under consideration— salvation from sin and in heaven, is by grace. "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God." (Eph. 2-8). "And if by grace, then it is no more of works ; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be by works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work." (Rom. 11-6). 

The Apostle shows as plainly as language can express a fact that this salvation is by grace, by the mercy, unmerited favor, of God . And then he just as clearly shows that it is by grace wholly, entirely, completely. No mixture of the grace of God and the works of men in this salvation. That it is entirely unconditional upon the part of man. Of course this salvation is not wrought out, accomplished, without conditions performed. There were conditions to perform. But there were none among the whole race of men to perform them. And so one came from heaven to perform them. This One was Jesus. He said of Himself, "I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of Him that sent me. And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which He hath given me I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day." (John 6: 38-39). This salvation was conditional and Jesus performed the conditions. He was the Executor of His Father's will, and He performed that will perfectly. Every stipulation was 

complied with, and the heirs of that will shall not fail to come into full possession of the benefits of the provisions of the will. He said, "All the Father giveth Me shall come to Me, and him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out." 

Their salvation is secure in Him, and to comfort His children, Jesus also said, "I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand." (John 10: 28). This salvation from death to life, from sin to holiness, from earth to heaven, is wholly by the grace of God, and is in no sense by the works of the creature. But when one has been born again, quickened into, or given eternal life, passed from death unto life, made a new creature in Christ Jesus, are there not duties for him to perform, obligations for him to fulfill, and salvations for him to work out? Are there not things in this life from which he can save himself? 

I learn by a reference to God's word that the word "salvation" is mentioned therein one hundred and sixty-two times. And I feel confident that while a portion of these one hundred and sixty-two references to salvation mean the salvation briefly discussed above, yet not all such references mean this salvation. And as God's responsible creatures, and we trust His children also, we should prayerfully and carefully study His word and seek to rightly divide the word of truth.

### EDITORIAL No. 4

## God's Government Over His Children is Parental

By a careful reading of the closing sentence in my last article you will note I make a distinction between God's creatures and God's children. I feel confident there is a Bible distinction. The oft heard expression in the religious world today— "The fatherhood of God, and the brotherhood of man," is very catchy to the natural ear and pleasing to the carnal mind. But is it true? We know God is the creator, upholder and preserver of all things; animate and inanimate. But He is not the father of all His creatures. Nor is He the father of all mankind spiritually, but only of those born of His spirit. Those born of His spirit are His children by virtue of the new birth. They are given eternal life and shall never perish. 

But some of the race of men shall perish, and some shall be saved. "When the Son of man shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit on the throne of His glory; and before Him shall be gathered all nations; and He shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats; and He shall set the sheep on His right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on the right hand, 'Come, ye blessed of My Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. * * * Then shall He say also unto them on the left hand, 'Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels."Mat.25 31-46).  

Jesus said to certain ones in plain language, "If God were your Father, ye would love Me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of Myself, but He sent Me. Why do ye not understand My speech? even because ye cannot hear My word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do." (John 8:42-44). "By their fruits ye shall know them." 

Many scriptures might be presented and logical argument advanced showing the erroneous teaching in the popular theory of the "Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man" as it is applied to things, spiritual. But I only wanted to say this much in order to set forth the position of Primitive Baptist on this subject as related to the "Fatherhood of God" of His people chosen in Christ. He is the spiritual father of His children. They are born of His spirit,— born again, born from above.

AND GOD'S GOVERNMENT OVER HIS CHILDREN IS A PARENTAL GOVERNMENT. He does not govern them as if they were blocks and stones to be moved about by physical force. They are led by His spirit; "For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God." (Rom. 8: 14). And it is not rightly dividing the word of truth to teach God's children, by tongue or pen, that when He wants them to obey Him, He will force them to do so. We earthly parents do not so deal with our children. Children are sometimes forced to obedience. 

But it is neither pleasant to the parents nor to the children. "To obey is better than sacrifice." To disobey is to suffer, Adam disobeyed, and suffered for his disobedience. In olden time it was written, "every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward." And since God does not change His method, or dealings with His people— "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?" 

God has given laws for the government of His people. Will they escape when they forsake His laws? He has established statutes for their guidance? Will they be punished when they break His statutes? He has, by prophet and apostle, and by His own Son also, given His children many commandments. If they keep not His commandments, will it be well for them? Are there no difference with the dealings of the Lord towards His people when they obey, and when they disobey? What saith the scripture on this subject? Here it is— "If His children, (the children God gave His Son), forsake My law, and walk not in My judgements; if they break My statutes, and keep not My commandments; then will I visit their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes." (Psa. 89: 30-32). 

Would the Lord do this if there were nothing to be gained by obedience? Would the Lord use the rod, and make the stripes, if He were pleased with His people in their disobedience? And through Isaiah (1: 18-20) God says to His people, "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword." 

"Let us reason together." Then God does reason with His people. Therefore, they are reasonable creatures. They are led and moved in a reasonable way, or God would not reason with them. Paul said "Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men." He could not, by persuasion, make men the children of God. But He could make them better children, more useful in this world, and more glorifying to God. "For we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in His body, according to that He hath done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men." 

And likewise, as above stated, the sins of God's people shall be washed and made white as snow,— not by obedience to law, but through the blood of Christ. And yet there are blessings promised in obedience:— "If ye be willing and obedient". Then the promise,— "Ye shall eat the good of the land." Is this not an inducement for God's people to obey. "But if ye refuse and rebel" then 

the warning. And in this warning God's people are not taught that in disobedience, they lose heaven and gain hell. But if ye refuse and rebel ye shall not eat the good of the land, but rather fall, be devoured, by the sword. 

And through Jeremiah (7: 23-24) God said, "Obey My voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be My people; and walk ye in all My ways that I command you, that it may be well with you. But they hearken not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination off their evil heart, and went backward and not forward." If they had obeyed they would not have gone backward. Disobedience leads us backward— leads us from God. Why obey?— "That it may be well unto you." 

Obeying the commandments of God does not make us His children, but manifests us as obedient children. All children should be obedient. `Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right." If it is right for natural children to obey their parents, is it not more important that God's children obey Him? "Honor thy father and mother; * * * that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest live long on the earth." (Eph. 6: 1-3). If blessings are promised natural children in obedience, is it strange that we find blessings promised God's children in obedience? There is a high and noble purpose in the obedience and good works of God's people. 

That purpose is not their eternal salvation. This was wrought out by Christ. This is by grace. But good works does no violence to the doctrine of grace, but rather establishes it, proves it, and makes it look more beautiful and sublime. "For we are His workmanship, created in Christ unto good works, which God hath before ordained that- we should walk in them." (Eph. 2: 10). Good works are ordered of the Lord. He has prepared them, set them forth in His word, and promised blessings in the performance of them. And "we should walk in them." His people make miserable failures often in the performance of good works. 

But they have no excuse in their failures, for when God requires duties of His children does He not give strength to perform them? We know Jesus said, "without Me ye can do nothing." But with Him, His children can do all things commanded of them. Paul said, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Phil. 4: 13). And the doctrine of Salvation by Grace should be adorned by a Godly walk and conversation. Such is the will of God. "For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. (Pet. 2: 15). 


There are many foolish men in the religious world. In all ages efforts have been made to show that the doctrine of Salvation by Grace alone tends to an evil life. And Primitive Baptists, more than any other people in all the world, should be careful to maintain good works." And though a Baptist may walk circumspectly, he should also be careful to impress upon others their duty to perform good work. Especially is this true of Ministering Brethren. They should in their preaching insist upon the performance of good works. The Bible abundantly bears them out in this course, for by a careful study of the scriptures we shall learn that only about one fourth of the written word tells sinners how they are saved, while about three-fourths tells them how they should live. Let no Primitive Baptist preacher in his zeal to preach salvation by grace, fail to insist upon the children of God walking worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called. They need to be put in mind "to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work." He is to "reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine." Therefore, let us exhort one another to love and to do good works, "and so much the more as ye see the day approaching. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." (Heb. 10: 25-27).

### EDITORIAL No. 5

## Good Works Not to Be Minimized

Now if it be true that about one-fourth of the written word of God tells sinners how they are saved, while about three-fourths tell them how they should live, who is bold enough to minimize good works? Who, of all the servants of God, should in this day preach doctrine continually to the exclusion of good works? Prophets and Apostles did not so do. They rightly divided the word of truth. They taught good works as God commanded them to do. And only such works as God commanded are really good works. And all He commands, are good works. Good works that God's children perform are not the cause of their salvation, but evidences of it. How can we in a better way, "make your (our) calling and election sure." How can we better manifest our thankfulness to God than by serving Him? And how can we better serve God than by serving one another here in this life? "Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men." (1 Thess. 5: 14. So brethren sometime need to be exhorted. Some are unruly. Some know not as much as others and should be instructed. Some are not as strong as others and need to be helped along over the rough places. All of us need to exercise patience. And Paul goes on further in this chapter and says, "See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow after that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men." Quite a lot of work laid out here. And all of it good works. Last summer at an Association I heard a minister contending against the preaching of good works. I fear he would not have enjoyed Paul's preaching. The Apostle goes on in the same connection and says: "Rejoice ever more." Have we not much to make us rejoice? Old Baptists ought to be a happy people. Moses thought so. He said, "Happy art thou, 0 Israel, saved by the Lord." Being saved by the Lord, ought we not rejoice evermore, live at peace among ourselves, and not fall out by the way? But Paul goes on and tells us to, "Pray without ceasing." If we continually have the spirit of prayer, we will not have time to entertain evil designs against our brethren. 

Some one has said that an idle brain is the devil's workshop." And is there not much truth in it? And in the same connection Paul says, "Quench not the Spirit." There is a sense in which God's children can quench the Spirit, or Paul would not have told them not to do so. It is not the personal Spirit that we quench, but the graces of the Spirit, the work of the Spirit in our heart. Is not the Spirit's work as a fire in our bones, a light to our feet, a warmth to our coldness, And can we not so live that we will feel less of this warmth of love and fellowship, and see less of the light that we once saw, "If ye sow to the flesh ye shall die."

But I had intended to write a little in this article on the relation of faith and good works. Read the Eleventh Chapter of Hebrews. What a wonderful record there of God's children. The faith they had was the "faith of God's elect." Every child of God has a measure of the same quality, but not the same quantity. It is a gift of God. God gives more to some than to others. And where much is given much is required. How about your faith, dear reader? Do you say," I have no faith in self, but all my faith is in God, so much so, that I love to hear the doctrine of salvation preached in its fullness. I want to hear of no other Saviour except Jesus.

I love to hear His word." Well then, James says to you, "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves." (Jas. 1: 22). James did not want God's people to be deceiving themselves about this matter of good works. And when they want to be hearers, and not doers, of God's word, they will actually deceive themselves. Have you ever been deceived by some one else? Did not feel very good about it, did you? Well now, if you have been one of those satisfied hearers of the word only; if you have not been concerned about being a doer of the word; if you have been taught by some preacher that to preach good works, and to do good works, would be Arminianism, have you not been deceiving your self? Was James an Arminian? James also said, "For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." Again, "Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone." Again James asks, "Was not Abraham our father, justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?" Can it be made perfect any other way? "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God." Can we be called the friend of God when we do not what He bids us do? Jesus said, "Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15: 14). When we are not careful to follow His commandments are we His friends? 

And there is a justification in proving our friendship for Jesus. Abraham was justified by works, but as Paul more fully explains, not before God. "For" says Paul, "if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not before God." (Rom. 4: 2). None can be justified before God by human works of whatever kind or character. The best of God's people do too little, and imperfection, more or less, is mixed with all our good works. 

But there is no contradiction between Paul and James. Paul was speaking of justification before God; James of justification before men; Paul of the justification of a person, James of the justification of a cause a man represents. Though we cannot be justified before God except in the perfect work of Jesus who stands for us, can we not, however, be justified before men, before the church of God if we are careful to maintain good works? Can we not stop the mouths of adversaries by walking right, really more so than by talking right? Are not actions stronger than words? I rejoice to know that Primitive Baptist preachers speak the truth when they
preach salvation by grace. "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast." But I love to hear them keep right on preaching the truth. "For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained (appointed, ordered) that we should walk in them." God having ordained good works, "we should walk in them." "The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. * * * Moreover by them is thy servant warned : and in the keeping of them there is great reward." (Psa. 19-8. 11). 

We know too "That without faith it is impossible to please God." But God gives His people faith, and we know that "he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is rewarded of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. 11-6). If there is great reward in keeping the commandments of the Lord, do not confuse God's children by telling them there is no reward in good works. If God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him, do not discourage God's children when He says to them, "Seek ye My face." Such preaching is confusing and is not rightly dividing the word of truth. And as you read of the wonderful faith manifested by God's servants in Hebrews, and other portion of God's word, you will see how faith wrought with their good works, and with works, not without works, was their faith made perfect.

### EDITORIAL No. 6
## We Are Not to Labor For the Kingdom, But Labor In It

There are in the world hundreds of different beliefs, religiously. Besides the various "isms" and "ites" in our own land, we are informed by the census report of religious bodies, if I mistake not, that there are eighteen different kinds of Baptists, seventeen different kinds of Methodists, twelve kinds of Presbyterians, several kinds of "Christians" or Disciples, several kinds of "Dunkards," and so on down the line of various religious beliefs. And each body of believers hold to some special doctrine, or view of doctrine, or of some particular practice which is different from others. 

But when it comes to the real belief upon the subject of salvation of the sinner—whether it is alone and altogether, all the time and under all circumstances, by the grace of God; or whether it is a kind of mixture of the grace of God and the works of man—there are but two classes of religionist. If Christ be the Saviour, the only Saviour, and it is His work alone that procures salvation from sin to holiness, (without which no man shall see God), then all who put their trust in Him, and Him only, are BELIEVERS. And conversely, those who put their trust in anything except the perfect work of Christ, are UNBELIEVERS. That is, they are unbelievers in Him to the same degree that they believe in, or depend upon, themselves or others.  

But in a little broader and more liberal sense there are three kinds of believers as plainly manifested in the religious lives of various religionist around us. First, those who believe in salvation by grace alone. Second, those who believe in salvation by works alone. Third, those who believe in salvation by grace and works. 

Every reader knows where the Primitive, or Old School Baptists stand. And it is our own people we are specially concerned about. We all know that they pin their faith to but ONE—that they do not put their trust in man. And like the early Christians, they are "a sect everywhere spoken against." But the "little flock" need not fear, "for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." (Luke 12: 32.)

And yet kind reader, while the kingdom is a gift of God to "the little flock", and they do not labor for it in the sense that they can deserve it on account of their labor. Still they are to labor in it. And every child of God when quickened into divine life, born again, and begins to see things in their true colors, feels impressed to do something. And preachers, when they have an opportunity, should teach them gospel duties. Paul's first prayer seems to have been, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" No longer was he concerned about doing the will of the high priest who had commissioned him to bind and persecute those who looked to Jesus for salvation. His proud spirit was humbled. His strong will subdued. He then could pray, "not my will, but thine be done." He wanted to know, and do, the Lord's will. And even after in life he was a tireless worker in the kingdom of his Lord. Though he preached salvation by grace stronger, and more clearly, possibly, than other of the Apostles, yet he just as clearly and strongly insisted upon the performance of good works. His prayer, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do," was answered. And he went to work doing something himself, and telling others what they should do. And he is a pattern other Baptist preachers should follow. Cornelius, another child of God, became concerned about doing something. God said to him in a dream," send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter: * * * He shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do." And when Peter told him what to do in order to serve in His kingdom, Cornelius did it. Serving the Lord as God's word tells us to serve, does not make us His children, but proves our obedience to Him, and our love for Him. Jesus said "If ye love Me, keep My commandments." And on the day of Pentecost, when Peter was preaching, some were pricked in their hearts. God had quickened them into divine life. Their hard and stony hearts had been taken away and a new heart given, and upon the tablets of their heart had been written His law. And when they heard, through Peter, how they had broken God's law—how they had crucified the Lord of glory—their pure minds were stirred up, 

their conscience condemned them, and they cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall we do? Peters' preaching did not make them God's children, but manifested them as God's children. Others were present who heard the same preaching and whose hearts were not pricked, but who went away mocking and said the Apostles were "full of new wine." How different is the same preaching received. But the difference is in the characters, not in the preaching. If the cause had been in the preaching, it would have had the same effect upon all who heard it. But God's children who were alive to their true condition, desired to know what to do. 

Then Peter said, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." They were told some things to do, and when they did those things, they were added to the church. Christ does that which adds you to heaven, you do that which adds you to the church. 

No doubt but that some are added to the church who will never reach heaven. And likewise some shall live in heaven who never live in the church on earth. But this does not lessen the obligation of God's children to do those things needful that they may live in the church. It only magnifies the grace of God that saves from sin, and proves that the religious work of some is not done in faith, and for the love of God, but in hypocrisy, and for the love of self.  But while on this scripture (Acts 2: 37-40), let us not forget that Peter did some more preaching, for we are told that with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation." Peter was not sparing with his words. He used "many other words." How many we do not know. But he gave testimony of the doctrine of salvation. And he exhorted to duty. And he plainly said, "Save yourselves." He did not tell them to save themselves from sin, or to save themselves in heaven. But "from this untoward generation." That generation was a wicked one. It was under the leadership and dominion of priests, scribes, and pharisees—a perverse generation of men upon whom should soon fall the wrath of God for their impenitence and unbelief, their rejection and evil treatment of Jesus, the Messiah. Could God's children separate themselves from, save themselves from this generation? Peter tells them to do so, and He certainly would not tell God's children to do that which they could not do. 

SO HERE IS A SALVATION THAT PERTAINED TO THAT GENERATION—TO THAT PERIOD OF TIME. Was it not a time salvation, or a salvation from a wicked people here on earth in this time state? But some object 

to the term time salvation. Would it sound better to call it a generation salvation? What ever you call it, let none seek to destroy the meaning of God's truth. Do not confuse God's children. Tell them plainly that Jesus alone can save them from sin and fit them for heaven, but that there are many evil things in this world—this time state—from which they can, and should, save themselves. God gives them life and liberty, faith and strength, and has promised to be an ever present help in time of need. Let them use, and not abuse, that which God gives them. Jesus said to His servants, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." 

Certainly it is good to do that which Jesus said do. God gives His children light. It then belongs to them. Use it. Do not put it under a bushel. Do not be ashamed of it. Let it shine before men. And let it so shine—in such a manner—that men may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Your heavenly Father should be glorified. He deserves all glory. It is good to glorify Him by good words—to sing, and pray, and preach— to testify publicly and privately and tell of His wonderful mercy—His loving kindness, to the children of men. But the strongest testimony is the testimony of good works. 

It is a good thing for men to hear your good words; but it is better for them to see your good works. Good words without good works is like sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. If you have any good works, let your light so shine that men may see them. And if you are a child of God you certainly can manifest some good works, for His Spirit dwells in you and produces good works. "Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you," And the fruit of the Spirit ,"is love, joy; peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, temperance, meekness." (Gal. 5-22-23). Dear Reader, are you not bearing, at least, some of these fruits? Do not deny your love for the dear Lord, for His church and His people:— and love directs you to service. 

Do not say you have no joy in the prospect of heaven through the perfect work of your blessed Redeemer; and joy needs to be expressed. Do not deny that you have in your heart at times a peace which the world cannot give, nor take away. And too, you want to be long suffering, and gentle, and good, and faithful, and temperate, and meek. Is not your very desire an evidence that you have in your heart the spirit of the matter? And wishing these things, there is a promise that you shall possess them in fullness, for such feelings are nothing less than that hungering and thirsting after righteousness with which we "shall be filled?" 

Then take courage, dear child. You are bearing some fruit. Take your place among God's people. March under His banner. Fight the fight of faith. Be ready for every good work and endeavor to bear much fruit, for Jesus said, "Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be My deciples." (John 15-8).

### EDITORIAL No. 7

## Two Systems:--One, Do and, live, the Other, Live and Do

In the world of religious workers there are two great systems. One may properly be called the system of DO AND LIVE. This system of works is illogical, unscientific and unbiblical. It cannot be sustained by good reasoning, nor by science, nor by the Bible. It is a system of religious works based on error. For it is a self-evident fact that the dead cannot act in order to live. Life must in all cases preceed action. And to put the sinner, "dead in tresspasses and sins," to work in order to obtain spiritual life, is a popular error of the religious world. It has ever been, and will ever be, a failure. Children may be sprinkled in infancy, but it does not change their nature. Adults may be baptized in water, but it will not cleanse from sin. Religious workers may by various methods "swell their numbers" and increase their membership, but they cannot regenerate the soul. They cannot make a child of God. They think they can, but thinking so, does not make it so. They can make children of error like unto themselves. Christ taught this truth plainly when he said, "Woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves." (Mat. 23: 15) Evidently the Pharisees, in the time of Christ, believed in the do and live system. But their system then, and the system now, is selfish and faithless, and would make man a co-worker with God in the matter of lifegiving, and salvation from sin. And no Primitive or Old School Baptists, and thousands of others who are not Baptists, believe in this do and live system. But they believe in the system of LIVE AND DO. For this system is logical, scientific and Biblical. "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." Life must preceed even the action of seeing. Life preceeds hunger, thirst, sorrow, pain, re, pentance, faith, belief, soul joy and true service. None of these things produce life, natural or spiritual. Life comes from The Giver Of Life. Christ said, "I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish." Now when this spiritual, eternal life is given one, then the live and do system of religious works appeals to him. AND THIS POINT I WOULD EMPHASIZE. I want to see all our people—all Primitive or Old School Baptists—and all others, who believe in the LIVE AND DO SYSTEM, to PROVE IT BY THEIR DOING. 

Now inasmuch as the position Baptists occupy on the doctrine of works is sound— that is, one must be alive spiritually before he can perform works acceptable to God, then, to be consistent, Baptists must "be careful to maintain good works." For if they teach that only the living children of God can perform acceptable works, and they perform not those works, then they would make it appear that they are not living children of God. Ought they not, so far as they possibly can, "make their calling and election sure?" And besides, have not the living children of God greater reason to serve God than others have to serve self ? If that part of the religious world who believe they can do something to make themselves children of God are busy laboring and toiling in their do and live system, should we not be equally busy and toiling in our live and do system? If they serve in order to be God's children, ought we not to serve because we are God's children? If they are willing to make sacrifices that they may obtain heaven, ought we not want to make sacrifice, because heaven has obtained us? If they labor to pay the debt of sin, ought we to labor less because the debt of sin has been paid by Christ? If they labor zealously from a selfish motive, ought we not labor just as zealously from a grateful motive? God's dear Son has done far more for us freely, than they can ever do for themselves working, and so we should lovingly labor to show forth praise and gratitude to Him. 

This seemed to be the Apostle Paul's view of service. As a Pharisee, believing and rejoicing in a false religion, he was a great worker. But when converted from the error of his way, he became no less active. Saul going about to establish his own righteousness was a worker for self. Paul going about to establish the righteousness of Christ was a worker for the Lord. Saul hoped to gain heaven by his own works. Paul hoped to obtain that glory world by the works of Christ. Saul built his house upon a sandy foundation, and it fell. Paul built his house upon The Rock, and it did not fall. Paul, the grace preacher was just as tireless a worker as was Saul the zealous Pharisee. And so it should be now. Primitive Baptist preachers claim to be grace preachers, and their claim can easily be established. Then if they agree with Paul in his preaching, let them agree with him in his working. He labored, and taught others to labor. Preaching a grace system of salvation, did not in his mind, make void a system of works. Advocating predestination did not lead him to feel satisfied with things just as he found them. Preaching election did not with him, exclude the preaching of faith, repentance, and good works. He said, "If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above." And this reminds me that I intended to write something along the line of seeking in this article.

As we examine God's word we shall find the word seek used about 241 times. Let us not forget that it is always applied to the living, either naturally or spiritually, as the case may be. The dead seek not, nor can they. Lazarus in the grave sought not life. When called from death to life he could be served, and serve others. His friends could not give him life. Jesus did that. But when given life his friends could "loose him and let him go." Then he could seek the things of this life. So with the children of God. 

When quickened into divine life—when called from the grave of carnality—then they can seek in the right way and from the right motive, spiritual things. Then they can serve, and be served by others, spiritually. Then they can seek, and knock, and find. And they are exhorted to seek. 
God said to National Israel when they should be scattered among the Gentiles, "If from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find Him, if thou seek Him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul." Again it is said, "when thou art in tribulation, and all these are come upon thee, * * * if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient unto His voice, * * * He will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee." (Deut. 4: 29-30). David in one of his Psalms exclaims, "Seek the Lord and His strength, seek His face continually." Again he said, "When thou saidst, `Seek ye my face; my heart said unto Thee, Thy face, Lord will I seek"'. (Psa. 27: 8). 

The Lord's work is a heart matter, and when, He speaks to us in regard to seeking Him and obeying His commandments, our heart testifies that it is right to do so, but our feet do not always walk as our heart would lead. Many of God's children in their heart have been lead to the Old Baptist church when their eyes have beheld the spiritual service there, but their feet have lead them elsewhere in the way of service. And many of God's childrn in the church fail to do things they are impressed in their heart to do. They wickedly forsake the Lord and walk in forbidden paths. And God does not lead them in sin, nor tempt them in sin. But He says to them "Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call ye upon Him while He is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our God for He will abundantly pardon." (Isa. 5-5: 6-7). This is to God's straying children—those who had been with the Lord and had departed. Let them return. To return to the Lord is evidence they had been with Him. This is a good text. Also the one in Mat. 6: 33-"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." And another one spoken by Jesus as recorded by Matt. 7: 7-8-"Ask, and it shall be given you ; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." This is the way Jesus preached to His children. 

Shall grace preachers today run shy of such practical preaching? I feel that there are not many preachers in the world who know how, as do the Old Baptist preachers, to properly apply such texts. They were not, by inspiration, applied to the unregenerate, unbelieving, faithless sinner. Nor should they be so applied by uninspired men. But it is often done. And unbelievers are told they have the power to ask, seek, and knock; that they must do such things in order to get into the kingdom. Freewill preachers seem to delight in stressing this point. 

But they never tell their hearers that they must be born into the kingdom, and that there is not a single exhortation, or command, in all the Bible, to be born again. It is a self-evident fact that the unborn cannot born themselves. These texts, as all others of like nature, belong to the children, and if grace preachers do not so apply them, it will not be done. Let us not surrender any portion of God's word to graceless preachers. Every portion of it is in harmony with every other portion. It all harmonizes. There is no confusion there. The confusion is in the minds of men. God inspired the Bible, and He is not the author of confusion. It is a lamp to our hearts, an inspiration to our souls. It does not contain eternal life, but it is a witness of Him in whom is eternal life. It tells us of our lost and ruined condition and shows the one way we can be saved from it. And it tells us that we "should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world." Then "Let us go forth therefore unto Him without the camp, bearing His reproach. For here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come. By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name. But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." (Heb. 13: 13-16).
EDITORIAL No. 8
Bible Invitations to be Given to Bible Characters

There are many invitations in the Bible. To invite is to summons; ask; bid; allure; attract. Arminians, in their preaching, are very liberal with their invitations. They invite everybody. They want to appear liberal, and so they contend that it is narrow, contracted and selfish not to extend the gospel invitation to every individual. This is one extreme. But there are a few Primitive Baptist preachers who seemingly have no need in their preaching for invitations to anybody. This is another extreme. Two wrongs does not make a right. To follow extremes leads further and further from the truth. 

To invite every body to the gospel feast is unauthorized by God's word. To invite no one is a violation of the same word. For while there are numerous invitations in the Bible, yet every invitation carries with it a description of those who are invited. The gospel feast is spread for gospel subjects. Gospel subjects will enjoy gospel food. They have the faith of God's elect:—all men have not faith. They hunger and thirst after righteousness; some men are filled with self-righteousness. They mourn because of an experimental knowledge of their sins:—some men are pharisical and thank God they are not like others whom thy consider far beneath them. So to rightly divide the word of truth with regard to invitations, we must apply those invitations to the same characters described by inspiration. To do otherwise would be doing violence to God's word. To take a Bible invitation in which a description of the invited are given, and extend that invitation to those who are not addressed, is pharisical officiousness that is unpardonable. On the other hand to take the same invitation and extend it to nobody, is a lack of duty that is condemnable.

Then let us examine some of the invitations given in God's word. "Come now, let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." In the matter of service and worship, God deals with reasonable creatures. In the above quotation from Isaiah 1:18, God is speaking to that remnant among the Jewish nation who realized their sinful condition and the wickedness of that nation. It was hope extended to them,— that even though they deserved to be cut off, and would be, if justice be given, yet there was pardon for the sinner at the bar of mercy. At this bar,—at the foot-stool of mercy—at the throne of grace—at the altar of his sacrifice and at the fountain of his blood, is where God reasons with sinners. 

And so we, as poor sinners, are encouraged as the Israelites were, to come boldly to the throne of grace and plead a Saviour’s sacrifice for the remission of sins. Only those who see and feel the need of a Saviour, who realize their deplorable condition, are to be reasoned with, when it comes to preaching a substitute for the sinner. Paul asked the Thessalonian  brethren to pray that he might be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. The most unreasonable people are those who are wicked and who do not realize it.

Here is an invitation God gave through this same prophet, (Isaiah, 55: 1) "Ho, ever one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money: come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price." The waters evidently have reference to the ordinances of the gospel. At that age it was manifested in types and shadows, but now in the fulness and sweetness of gospel service. But who are the invited? Some extend the invitation to every one. And the text says "every one". But it says more than this, and this one word more is the address to the invitation. If we leave off the address, the invitation will not reach the right character. 

So here we find thirsty people invited. And only the thirsty. "Ho, every one that thirsteth;" not those who may become thirsty later on, or those who would like to taste the waters from curiosity; or those who have an idea that to join the church and partake of the ordinances will make them more popular. None of these are invited,— only those that thirst. And this thirst is not a thirst for natural things, but a spiritual thirst. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness." One must be born into this natural kingdom to thirst for natural things. So one must be born again—born spiritually—before there is a thirst after righteousness. Those who thus thirst, are God's children. The church is a home for them. The ordinances are for them. And every thirsty one is invited to come. Come and buy milk and honey—the good things of the gospel kingdom, without money and without price. These good things are to be bought—and strange to say—they are to be bought without money, and without price. We cannot pay for God's blessings—we can only enjoy them and thank Him for them. And the poor, those who have no money (self righteouseousness) are to buy. How? Jesus provides their necessities. They are to plead his righteousness, march under his banner, and sit at his table. "Ye thirsty ones, come."

In Matt. 11: 28, we have the record where Jesus says, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." The Master does not invite all. He does not say, "Every body, come." The persons invited are not all the individuals of mankind. But here, as elsewhere, the invitation is given with a restriction. All ye that labor, and are heavy laden. And Jesus does not mean those who are laboring in the service of sin, serving Satan, and laden with iniquity and insensible of it. Such characters are not weary of sin. Nor do they feel burdened with it. Nor are they seeking rest for their souls. 

But the characters Christ invites are those who feel burdened with the guilt of sin in their conscience; who feel pressed down with the yoke of the law and human traditions. They are laboring to live right and to please God, but find they cannot. And it is these that are encouraged to come to Him, to lay down their burdens at His feet and look to Him, for salvation. "And I will give you rest." This rest is given to God's living, sin-laden children, through faith in Him. It is a gift. 

But there is another rest mentioned in this text which is not given; It is a rest found. Lay down the yoke of the law. It is unbearable. The burden under the law is too heavy for you; dear children of God. Jesus says put off this yoke, and, "Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls." "For My yoke is easy, and My burden light." Does not this taking His yoke mean to serve Him? And in serving Him will we not find rest? Will we find this rest if we do not serve Him? There is a rest in faith—a rest given; and there is a rest in service—a rest found.


Another text we find bearing on the same truth reads thus, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth, say Come. And let him that is athirst, come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." (Rev. 22: 17). Here we have the thirsty and willing ones invited. Let him that is athirst, come. If one is not thirsty for the things of the kingdom of God, he is not invited. Thirsty souls are living souls. To live naturally is to thirst for natural things. To live sipritually is to thirst for spiritual things. And so then it is said, "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." Those who have a will to divine and spiritual things, whosoever they be, are invited. But no one can work this will to divine and spiritual things in himself. "For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure." God works in His people the will to do, and the power to do, of His good pleasure. And as His servants they should faithfully serve Him. 

Sometimes they are stubborn, disobedient and unwilling. But in Psalms 110, we are told, "Thy people shall be willing in the day of Thy power." God's power must be manifested in the sinners perverse and stubborn will, to make him willing. When made willing, he is a different character. And in this text he is invited. But he is not invited to take life, or eternal life, or to be saved. If he is a willing one, in the sense of this text, he is already 
saved. He has eternal life. And now he is invited to take the water of life. 

The water of life, no doubt, designs the free favor and love of God—the joy, comfort and consolation to be experienced in spiritual service and worship of God—the refreshing milk and honey of the gospel. Every willing one is invited to take this water of life—to drink of it and enjoy it—and to do so freely. There is no charge. It is without money and without price. Naturally, in this life we get thirsty for natural water. We become thirsty because we are alive. And we drink water, not to give life, but to refresh life. So it is in a spiritual sense. The willing, thirsty ones are alive spiritually. They are invited to "take the water of life," not that they may have spiritual life, but that they may be refreshed. How clear are these truths! And every Primitive Baptist minister should invite and encourage God's hungry and thirsty children to the gospel feast. Jesus invites the laboring and heavy laden souls. So should we. Let us go, as the Master directs, into the "lanes and streets of the city" and "into the highways and hedges" and "bring in the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind." The poor need to be told that the Master has a robe of righteousness for them. 

The maimed need to be assisted—they cannot walk very well. The halt need to be encouraged—they should be told not to confer with flesh and blood. The blind need to be led—they cannot see how to walk to the table on which there is a feast of fat things. Let us handle God's word carefully and apply the invitations to the same characters we find described in the invitation, and to none but these. But let us not neglect to preach this part of the gospel. And when we exhort God's children to duty, let us give them an opportunity to take upon themselves the yoke of service. When we invite them to the gospel feast, let us open the door for them to come in. 

I have heard sermons along the line of exhortation, and then no opportunity given, during the meeting, for the performance of gospel duties. I do not think this is right. Let us try to help each other on the road of life, and try to do so at the right time and in the right way. "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4: 16).

### EDITORIAL No. 9

## Christians Have A Race To Run

The Christians life in this world is likened to a race. All of us know what the word race means as applied to activity. The racers run, or go swiftly. There is competition among them for there is something to be won. Preparation and training are needful for successful running. Heavy and burdensome apparel that will impede the runners progress is not worn. And as the runners enter the race, great interest is manifested by the onlookers. Who does not like to witness a race? And so the apostle Paul said to God's children, "Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us." (Heb. 12-1). 

Paul was an advocate of Christians running in the race. He was a runner himself. The race was set before him. He did not set it before him. At first Paul was running the race to ruin, but God's mercy found him. Jesus met him on the road to Damascus. He was changed from a persecutor and became a defender of Jesus and his people. And Jesus meets every one of His people somewhere on the road of life. They learn from Him lessons they can never learn from human teachers. For saith the Lord, "I will put my laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be unto them a God, and they shall be to Me a people." (Heb. 8: 14). But the 

Lord does not say they shall be unto Him an obedient people. They should be. They should run the Christian race with patience. Many witnesses are watching them. They should lay aside every weight. The burden of sin felt in our heart should be put on Christ—He is our sin-bearer. The practice of sin should be laid aside, put off. The love of the world and undue care for riches and honor, should be laid aside. And the sin which doth so easily beset should be laid aside. I suppose this may mean one's constitutional sin—some particular sin that is specially pleasant. Such a sin is easily fallen into, and become habitual—hard to throw off. 

Or it may be the sin of unbelief. God's children, though they know the truth in their hearts are often led from a belief of it. How many doubting Thomases are there among us? How many doubt his promises to guard and guide—to comfort and sustain—to uphold and provide? Will He not fulfill every promise? Let us trust and serve Him? Let us endeavor day by day to lay aside the heavy weights that press us down, and the sin that so easily besets us, and let us run with patience, "looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God." Was there joy set before Jesus? Inspiration says, "yes." "Who for the joy that was set before Him, endured the cross, despising the shame." If there was joy set before Jesus as He labored, and toiled, and ran the race, is there not joy set before His children as they run the race set before them? If no joy and reward is set before them how shall we understand the following scriptures? "He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." "And, behold, I come quickly; and My reward is with Me, to give every man according as his work shall be. (Rev. 22: 12). Moses esteemed "the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward." "And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance ; that they might obtain a better resurrection." There is joy ahead for the Christian racers. They should be encouraged, for they shall be brought off more than conquerers  through Him that loved them.

Paul rebukes the Galatian brethren for not obeying the truth. I suppose they could have obeyed the truth. If they could not, why rebuke them? Some few Baptists hold an extreme idea about obedience that is confusing. They seem to teach that God makes His children do all that they do. If He wants them to join the church, they just can't help it. If they do not join, they just can't help it. And so all through life they just have to do all that they do. I do not like this idea of obedience. I think it really destroys the spirit of obedience. 

Obedience is dutifulness. Dutifulness pertains to duty. As God's children, we are under obligation to love and serve Him continually. His word teaches us to do so. And His spirit does not influence us not to do so. And yet we find ourselves often going astray. Why? "Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth." (Gal. 5: 7). "0 foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you." (Gal. 3: 1). Paul was concerned about the people among whom he labored obeying the truth. And when they did not obey, he tells them that they have been hindered and bewitched. And he does not excuse them for it. In fact they were foolish for being bewitched. They ran well for a while. When they first set out in a profession of religion they held fast, and were zealously attached to the truths of the Gospel. No doubt they were diligent in the discharge of duty, loved the service of God, and were careful to maintain good works. But false teachers came along. 

Evidently, some taught that justification comes not by the works of Christ, but that you must do the work yourself. So they went back to the Law and became Moses' disciples. Maybe other teachers taught that you cannot be justified by what you do, and so the Galatians foolishly concluded to do nothing—to obey not the truth. But they should have obeyed the truth. They did wrong in not obeying the truth. And God did not predestinate that they should not obey the truth. God's predestination does not influence to evil, but delivers from evil and conforms to the image of Jesus.
In the 9th Chapter of 1st Cor., Paul tells us more about this business of running the Christian race. He mentions this fact, "Every man that striveth for the mastery—that is in the race—is temperate in all things." An intemperate man need not run in the race for intemperance destroys strength of character, of mind, and of body, and such a runner will always be left behind by the temperate racers. Is there not food for thought here for those in the Christian race. There are some Baptists who are intemperate. They become extremists and waste their energy on non-essentials. Or they employ their mind in things too deep for them to solve. Why run, as an uncertainty? Why fight, as one that beateth the air? "So run, that ye may obtain." And keep your body under, and bring it into subjection. Can this be done? Some do it. Paul did. He said, "I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air: But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway." 

Have you ever known a preacher to become a castaway after preaching to others? If so, how about that man's life and character? Was he not intemperate in speech or action? Did he not cast himself away? Is he justified in charging his condition to God's predestination or purpose? "Be sure your sin will find you out." "If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: * * * But let none of you suffer as a murdered, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busybody in other men's matters". (1 Pet. 14-15).

"But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; they shall mount up with wings as eagles ; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." (Isa. 40-31). 

Dutiful children wait upon their parents; servants wait upon their masters; beggars knock and wait at the door for a gift. God's children should wait upon Him, and serve Him. God gives them strength to approach and wait upon Him, and when they do so, they renew their strength. There is a growth of grace and knowledge. And there is a growth of strength by using in a good cause the strength given us. What a blessing it is to "run and not be weary" in the service of the Lord. And as we humbly, and faithfully, prayerfully and lovingly, patiently and temperately in the service of our Master, leaning on Him, trusting in Him, following Him, and running after Him, we shall run, and not be weary, we shall walk, and not faint. 

And after awhile—in God's time, we shall receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls. Then "Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for He is faithful that promised). And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works." (Heb. 10: 22-24).

### EDITORIAL No. 10

## Predestination Examined

Recently I was asked this question, "Are you an absolute predestinarian, or a limited predestinarian ?" So far as I understand the Bible doctrine of predestination, I am
neither. I am simply a Predestinarian. The Bible terms and plain applications suit me. I do not care to try to make predestination stronger or more extensive by prefixing the word "absolute," and affixing the term "of all things." It is not necessary, for predestination is just right as we find it in the Bible. "Absolute predestination of all things," is a term of modern origin. It is not a Bible term. 

The word "absolute" is never used in the Bible. Why contend for a word that inspiration had no use for? Why not give our time and energy to the study and application of Bible words and terms? For instance, the word "love" is used in the Bible three hundred and six times. Yet some preachers seem to find more pleasure in preaching and writing about the word "absolute" than they do about the word "love." And the word "serve" is used two hundred and five times; the word "served" one hundred and thirty-one times; the word "obey" sixty-nine times, and the word "obeyed" forty-one times. Would it not be better to pay more attention to these words and make application of the lessons taught by them, than to show so much concern over uninspired words and terms?  

Love, and not predestination, is the greatest thing in the world. God is love. It is nowhere intimated in the Bible that God is predestination. Predestinaion is only an act of God. Can we not be of more service in the world by serving , than we can by trying to explain the unexplainable? 

We can hardly read a short chapter in the Bible without having some lesson of service presented, or some exhortation to obedience given. Why not preach more about love, and duty and service? We should not neglect predestination. Neither should we make a hobby of it. But we will if we undertake to explain all about it and apply it to all things. And not only will we spend our time hobby-riding, but we will confuse God's children who, with their thoughts, try to keep up with us. 

Have you ever watched people riding around on hobby-horses? And is it not rather confusing to the onlookers. And it certainly gets the rider nowhere. Hobbyriding is an unprofitable business, whether literally or theologically. 

And there is another brotherly criticism I believe I will make. It is this. To undertake to strengthen the doctrine of predestination by prefixes and affixes, savours too much of Uzzah trying to steady the ark of Israel. God had purposed to bring the ark from Kirjah-jearim on a new cart. But Uzzah concluded to give special assistance 

in the matter. To him it looked like the ark would fall. (Some brethren seem to think predestination will fall unless they prop it with "absolute" and spread it over "all things.") But the ark did not fall, though "the oxen shook it." Yet Uzzah "put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it." His motive seemed good. He wanted to keep it from falling. But "the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him for his error; and there he died by the ark of God." (2 Sam. 6: 4-7). 

I think Uzzah was a child of God, a very zealous and devoted one. But he made a mistake by undertaking to make a thing more secure that was already secure. For his folly he died. God smote him. Will not God smite His servants when they neglect the teaching of plain truths and duties and undertake to teach uninspired expressions of men? I do not mean a literal death. But have you known preachers to die in the sense of usefulness, influence and fellowship? Have you known churches to die while they yet lived? To the church at Sardis the Spirit said, "I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die." Rev. 3:1-2.

While the word "absolute" is not to be found in the Bible, the word "limited" is found but one time, and then not in connection with predestinaion. David in writing 

about the disobedience of Israel said, "How oft did they provoke Him in the wilderness, and grieve Him in the desert! Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the- Holy One of Israel." Psa. 78: 40-41. Those who were limiting God were turning back. They provoked the Lord and grieved Him in the desert. Because some go to one extreme in their contention for "absolute predestination of all things," why go to another extreme in limiting predestination? Inspiration itself has done that. No where in the Bible is it taught that God predestinated all things that come to pass. 

All that God does, He predestinated to do. But it is not taught by inspiration that God predestinated the wicked acts of devils and men. God is pure and holy and tempts no man to sin. He hates sin, warns against it, and will punish for it. His attitude toward sin is permissive and overruling. Far it be from God, that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity." Job. 34: 10. 

And no Primitive Baptist should construe the glorious and comforting doctrine of predestination in such a manner as to make God the author of sin directly, or indirectly. It is not Primitive Baptist doctrine that wickedness is carried on by the hand and power of God. The Lord need not do such work. Wicked men and devils will do it. And pandemonium would reign and wickedness over-run the earth but for God's restraining power. 

Very little is said in the Bible about the devil, and all that is said is in the way of condemnation and warning. Paul determined to know nothing among the people save Jesus and Him crucified. He did not seem to be worrying about who the devil was, where he came from, and where he was going. He was wise, but not wise above that which was written and revealed. But he was careful to teach "us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lust, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world."

PREDESTINATION:—means to predetermine or foreordain: to appoint or ordain beforehand by divine purpose or decree. The word is used two times in the Bible, viz "For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the first born among many brethren. Moreover whom He did predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called; them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He also glorified. (Rom. 8: 29-30). Here we havee set forth predestination as Paul preached it. It is a link in the chain of God's salvation. It is God's purpose being carried out in salvation. God predestinated His people to be conformed to the image of His Son. He did not predestinate that they sin, but to be saved from sin. Sin came by man—not by God's predestination. "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned." (Rom. 5: 12).

PREDESTINATED:—this word is used twice in the Bible, "Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to Himself ?" and, "In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of Him who worketh all things after the, counsel of His own will." (Eph. 1: 5 and 11), Our adoption into the family of Jesus is according to God's predestination. The inheritance of His children is obtained alone in Christ through God's purpose and predestination. This makes salvation sure to the heirs of promise. They shall be conformed to the image of Jesus. That is, they shall be made like Him. Here they are not free from the effect, nature, and penalty of sin. They desire to be, and in God's way and time, shall be. They shall see Him as He is, be like Him, and be satisfied. And all this will be accomplished through God's purpose, grace, and predestination.

### EDITORIAL No. 11

## Utility or Use of the Gospel

The "Utility, or use of the Gospel," has for a long time been a matter of discussion. Divisions have arisen because of difference of views on this subject. The Gospels, in the sense of written messages, are usually confined to the writing of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. In a broader sense, all that God has given us in His word, and all the teaching of this written word, is the gospel. And so the preaching of the truth in regard to the salvation of sinners, is the Gospel. The word GOSPEL, is made up of two words, god spel, and means "good news." And in this sense of the word we want to look into the use of preaching and teaching. Primitive Baptists have clearly defined views on this subject. They feel it is not a matter for speculation, or to be guessed at, but that the Bible itself clearly defines the utility of the Gospel. 

The popular idea of the Gospel is that it is a means of salvation in heaven of sinners that otherwise would not be saved. Some contend that it must be preached, or there can be no salvation for the sinner. Others have a little broader view and contend that the Gospel brings the sinner in touch with God whereby God can reach and save the sinner. The idea seems to be that there is a circle of Godly influence outside of which no sinner can be saved, and that the use of the Gospel is to bring the sinner into this circle, or good influence, where God can reach him.  

Still others have the idea that God uses the Gospel as a vehicle by which salvation is conveyed to the sinner. And others still, who believe that the alien sinner is dead to spiritual things, claim that the Gospel is needful that the sinner may be quickened into divine life; that God uses the preached Gospel for this purpose. * * * Now our people deny all such positions. They may be ignorant, but they have enough sense to see the sandy foundation on which such advocates stand. They may be somewhat blind, but they can see that such a platform is entirely too narrow for the sinners salvation and God's glory. They may be dull of hearing, but they well know that there is no joyful sound in a Gospel, which would place salvation in the hands of men rather than in the hands of God. And this is what is taught by all who in any sense make the eternal salvation of sinners depend upon the works and teaching of the creature. 

Narrow indeed is that system that limits salvation to where the Gospel is preached. It consigns two thirds of the human race to eternal woe. It holds out no hope for the infant and the lunatic to be saved if the Gospel must be heard and believed. It dethrones God and robs Him of glory, since salvation of sinners extends no further than the minister travels and preaches. Primitive Baptist preachers do not claim to be "salvation peddlers." To be sure, there is a saving influence in the Gospel. The Gospel when received in honest hearts, and believed, saves from delusion, from error, from a guilty conscience, saves gospelly in the church, but does not save from the being and the effect of sin. The blood of Christ alone does that, and that application is made by the Holy Spirit. Jesus is the author of eternal salvation.	

But let us examine some testimony on the subject. Paul said "And he gave some apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers. For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." (Eph. 4: 11-12). All these servants were gifts to the church. They were given to do the work specified. It is not specified that they were to make saints out of sinners. This cannot be done by the preached word.  

Paul was preaching one time in the city of Corinth. He was meeting opposition. He concluded to leave, but, "Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace; For I am with thee; and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee; for I have much people in this city." (Acts. 18: 9-10). Paul’s preaching could not make the Lord's people. They were already in the city, and Paul did not know it. Paul was to hunt them out and teach them and establish them in the truth.

Paul was no Modern Missionary Baptist. True, he believed in preaching, and did more of it possibly than any man in all the world. But he did not preach in order to make believers out of unbelievers. Real, true believers are born of God. They are not born of God because they believe, but they believe because they are born of God. The perishing could not be saved from perishing by Paul's preaching, They looked upon it as foolishness. "But unto us which are saved it is the power of God." (1 Cor. 1: 18). The preaching of Paul which was to the lost only foolishness and could not save them, was a blessing to another class. For "it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe." (v. 21). 

Not by foolish preaching. The preaching of the cross is not foolish preaching. It is the height of wisdom. But by "the foolishness of preaching." Unbelievers consider it foolishness. It has no saving influence to them. But how strange to the worldly minded, that though it did not reach the unbeliever, it did "save them that believe." The Gospel, therefore, wnich Paul preached saved the saved. Isn't this strange? Yet this is true. God saved by His grace from sin. And then the sinner thus saved is by the Gospel saved from error, from false doctrines of men and devils. 

Paul testifies in another place (2 Tim. 1: 10) that life and immortality is brought to light through the Gospel. The Gospel does not bring life and immortality, but brings it to light. In the light of the gospel, such as Paul preached, we can see the beauty of salvation stored up in Christ for all the promised seed, that is if we "have eyes to see." Some have eyes and see not. The Gospel does not give us eyes. God does that, and the preaching of the truth opens them, so we can more clearly see and understand the wonderful things God has done for His people. This is the way Paul talked about it. And in his defense before Agrippa he told his experience. (Acts 26 chap). He said God sent him among the Gentiles, "To open their eyes, and to turn them, from darkness to light," etc. 

Some of the Gentiles had been given eyes to see and needed instruction. Cornelius was one of this kind. He was a child of God before ever Peter preached to him. Peter taught him that God had a people among all nations. He also commanded Cornelius to be baptized. The eunuch was another Gentile to whom God sent Phillip to teach. (Acts 8: 26-40). He wanted to be guided. Phillip was sent to guide him. Not to guide into heaven, but into the pathway of duty. 

Jesus guides into heaven. He is the way, the truth, and the life. He is the door. But God's called and qualified servants can by their preaching bring life and immortality to light, open eyes that are blinded by prejudice and tradition, and guide in the way of gospel 
service. Jesus said: "My sheep hear My voice." They are His sheep. He does not send His servant out to save them in heaven. He does that. But He sends them to feed, and instruct, and comfort. "Feed My sheep." "Feed My lambs." "Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." "Comfort ye, comfort ye, My people." This is a wonderful work for the preacher. Why cannot all preachers be content to abide in their calling and not undertake to do the work of the Lord. They can no more do His work of saving sinners from sin and preparing them for heaven than men could call Lazarus from the grave. Jesus called him from the grave. His friends were told to "loose him and let him go." This they could do, and this they did. But some say "when will the world be brought to the feet of Christ by the way the Old Baptists preach. When will the devil be defeated and the world be saved by your Gospel?" We reply that all this will be done just as quickly, and in the same manner, that Jericho fell. Just as quickly, and in the same manner, that the Egyptians were defeated and destroyed. 

We are to do the bidding of the Lord, nothing doubting. When He says "Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord", do so. When He says "Go forward," do that. When He says capture the strong city Jericho by marching around blowing the ram's horn, just march and blow. The power of God will be manifest and the walls shaken down in His time and way. And when "the fullness of the Gentiles come in" the Jews shall again, be blessed.  

Suppose God should bless them as He blessed Paul! Would not knowledge cover the earth as the waters cover the sea? Let us look alone to God for salvation from sin. Man is a failure. With all the boasted progress and righteousness of this twentieth century, the scarcity of pure and undefiled religion is evident. Crime is prevalent. Unselfishness is unusual. And according to statistics there are more heathen in the world today than ever before.

### EDITORIAL No. 12

## General Remarks--Conclusion

This is the twelfth article I have written on this subject and published in Advocate and Messenger for the consideration of our readers. This subject is inexhaustible, but it is my mind to leave it for the present, and if the Lord will, to write on other subjects. And in this closing article I want to write in a general way as my mind may be led.

First, I want to say that the truths I have discussed in these previous articles are clear in my mind and sweet in my experience. I have not written that which I half-way believe. Nor have I endeavored to reveal secret things. "Secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children forever, that we may do all the words of this law." (Deut. 29: 29). 

I have felt it is more profitable to write and preach the truths plainly taught, rather than spend our time trying to reveal secret things. The Bible is God's revealed mind, will, and purpose, to man. If we are satisfied with these plain truths, and faithfully commit them to others, we shall do well. Sin is a terrible thing,—God's word so portrays it. And sin came by man, not by God's ordering. Is he the friend of God who would charge sin to God? 

And is he a wise builder who spends his time digging in Adam's garden trying to find out what would have happened if Adam had not sinned. Man has the terrible disease—sin. What we want to know is the remedy for sin. And the "word of truth" reveals the remedy. 

The devil is in the world. He is our adversary, and as "a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." (1 Pet. 5: 8). We are not so much concerned about where he came from, and where he is going, as we are how he is to be conquored. "The word of truth" tells us how he is to be conquored. But we are to "steadfastly resist him in the faith." Why God permitted sin to enter into the world, and why He still permits evil to exist, "the word of truth" does not fully reveal. Nor should His servants undertake to explain. It is unexplainable. 

Real wisdom accepts facts rather than ask the reason why. Listen to His thanksgiving, "I thank Thee 0 Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in Thy sight." (Mat. 11: 27). Jesus didn't ask the reason why certain truths were revealed to some and hid from others. Should His servants try to appear "wise above that which is written?" It is not always complimentary to call one "a deep preacher." Water looks deep sometimes when it is only muddy.  

Second, I want to say that I have in these articles desired to write mainly for the benefit of our own "household of faith." I have not made it a point to defend the doctrine dear to every Baptist. I know that the Goliaths should be slain and God will raise up a David here and there to slay them. Mockers of Israel, and of Israel's God, will not be suffered to ever continue in their pride and bigotry. And we rejoice that we have among us strong defenders of the faith. And it is a great work. 

But it is no doubt a greater Work "to feed the church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood," "to preach the word: * * * reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine," and to encourage, edify and unify God's children. This I would love to do. God's children need the church as a resting place, and too, they need the service of faithful under-shepherds. And these undershepherds should labor together in love. They should not fall out by the way. When the leaders fight, the flocks are scattered. Being united on the precious principles of truth they should be forbearing in non-essentials. 

Customs and practices are often the outgrowth of environment in which no principle of truth is involved, and should not be made "bones of contention." Nor should we make our brother "an offender for a word." It is wise and safe to let each put his own construction on the words he uses. Some time the user does not mean by them that which the hearer thinks he does. Mote hunters never make useful servants to the church. To hunt motes in the eyes of others is to not see the beams in our own eyes. And severe, judgment, judgment without mercy, is a mark of the hypocrite. Jesus was very severe in His denunciations against hypocrites. Better try in love and meekness to save the erring brother from the error of his way rather than to load him down with calumny. 

"Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins." (Jas. 5: 20). And let us as ministers strive for peace and good will. "If it be possible, as much as Iieth in you live peaceably with all men." (Rom. 12: 18). "As we therefore have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith. (Gal. 6: 10). And we all should so live as "to have a good report of them without" as well as those that are within. And remember "the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out , of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.” 2 Tim. 2: 24-26). 

"Blessed are the peace makers; for they shall be called the children of God". "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God." 

"Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you." (2 Cor. 13: 11).
APPENDIX

Note—I am appending hereto an article on the Bible. Also an editorial on the "Unprofitable and Deplorable Strife of Words" written years ago by Elder S. Hassell, and which was reproduced in Zion's Advocate. Also answers by the same writer to a few questions. As the subject matter in these articles is of the same nature as that covered by my editorials, I feel that the interested reader will find them both entertaining and profitable.
THE BIBLE

The Bible was more than sixteen hundred years in writing and contains a history of the world. It was given by the inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness that the man of God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. The man of God—those who claim and hope to be God's children— need no other Guide Book. All that is profitable to be taught religiously whether in doctrine or practice is found in the Bible. God's people should listen to no doctrine in the sense to accept and believe it as the truth, if such doctrine is not taught in God's Word. Nor should they follow any religious practice not authorizd by the Head of the Church. But they should be careful to maintain in doctrine and practice the truths of inspiration. 

The Bible contains 66 books, 1,189 chapters, 31,114 verses. In my Biographical History there is an article on the Bible written by Elder John Leland, in which many interesting and instructive things are brought to light. It is well that we read this blessed book and read what other good people have said about it; make it the man of our counsel and the lamp to our feet, for of all books it alone points out clearly the Rock of our Salvation.

Recently I came across the following good description of the Bible, though the writer's name was not mentioned. He said the Bible contains: "The mind of God, the state of man, the way of salvation, doom of sinners, and happiness of believers. Its doctrines are holy, its precepts are binding, its histories are true, and its decisions are immutable. Read it to be wise, believe it to be safe, and practice it to be holy. It contains light to direct you, food to support you, and comfort you, and cheer you. It is the traveler's map, the pilgrim's staff, the pilot's compass, the soldier's sword, and the Christian's character. Christ its grand subject, our hope its design, and the glory of God its end. It should fill the memory, rule the heart; and guide the feet. Read it slowly, frequently, prayerfully. It is a mine of wealth, a paradise of glory, and a river of pleasure. It is given you in life, will be open at the judgment, and be remembered forever. It involves the highest responsibility, rewards the greatest labor, and condemns all who trifle with its holy contents."
ANOTHER UNPROFITABLE 
AND DEPLORABLE STRIFE OF WORDS

1 Tim. vi. 3-5; 2 Tim. ii. 14. I have earnestly labored for years (I hope not without success, which I gladly confess is due entirely to the Lord), to show that the contention, among Primitive Baptists, in regard to the extention of predesination is, when properly understood, a mere unprofitable and unwholesome strife of words. Every true Baptist believes that God fore-knows and controls all things; and no true Baptist believes that God influences or compels His creatures to sin. Thus God's fore-knowledge or predestination of sin is not of a caustive or compulsive, but of a permissive, directive, restrictive and overruling character. So far as I am aware, the war, among the most of our brethren, on the extent of predestination seems to have about ended; the vexed question being finally settled on this immutable basis of scriptural and eternal truth.

Another equally unnecessary and unprofitable verbal contention among a few Primitive Baptists is one similar to, if not connected with, the controversy on predestination. It is the question concerning what is called "the conditionality of time salvation," and, connected with this, the question as to the ability of the child of God to obey the commandments of his Heavenly Father.


All Primitive Baptists are agreed upon the unconditionality of our eternal salvation, and the inability of those, who are dead in sin to render spiritual obedience to the law of God;  Instead of repentance and faith being conditions pre-requisite to salvation, we understand that they are the work of the Holy Spirit in the renewed heart, and are thus essential parts of salvation; and, until this spiritual renewal, the fallen child of Adam will love sin and hate holiness and continue in rebellion against God.

But there is an apparent disagreement in two or three of our Associations, among worthy and lovely brethren, who would be heartily fellowshipped and gladly welcomed by other Primitive Baptists everywhere, as to whether our time salvation, that is, our deliverance from spiritual darkness, coldness, distress, and chastisement during the present life is conditioned or dependent upon our obedience to God, and as to whether the child of God is able to obey God or not.

Now, even the authors of dictionaries have no right to manufacture or change the meanings of words; their business is simply to ascertain and state the meanings which words actually and already have in the language of which they treat. It would be deceptive to use words in a different sense from that which they generally have, unless we explain the sense which we mean. The most of controversies are strifes of words; and when words are properly defined, and their correct meaning is accepted by both parties, the controversy ends.

A "condition" is defined by the best of English dictionaries to be "an event, object, fact, or being that is necessary to the occurrence or existence of some other, though not its cause; a prerequisite; that which must exist as the occasion or concomitance of something else; that which is requisite in order that something else should take effect; an essential qualification." And these dictionaries say that the word "if" is "the typical conditional particle, and is nearly always used to introduce the subordinate clause of a conditional sentence," and means "on the supposition that; provided, or on condition that; in case that, granting, allowing, or supposing that."

There are 1,422 "ifs" in the Bible—830 in the Old Testament, and 592 in the New Testament ; and these conditional sentences make up about one-fifth part of the Bible. Thus forty-nine fiftieths of the Scriptures are unconditional, and one fiftieth is conditional. All reverent minds must admit that this conditional part of the Scriptures, though comparatively small, has a real and true meaning.


It cannot be denied by any informed and honest man that such Scriptures as the following are conditional: "If His children forsake My law, I will visit their transgression with the rod, nevertheless My loving-kindness will I not utterly take from Him" (Psalms lxxxix. 30-33). "If ye be willing and obedient, ye.shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. i. 19, 20). "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them" (John xiii. 17). "If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." (Rom. viii. 13). How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?" (Heb. ii 3). "If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin.". (I John 1i 7). 

See, also, such scriptures as Lev. xxvi; Deut. iv. 29-31; vii. 12-26; xi. 13-32; xxviii. ; Ezek. xviii., . xxxiii. Not only is it certain that these Scriptures are conditional, but it is equally certain that the condition, introduced by "if," necessarily precedes the conclusion, which would not take place unless the condition took place first. If the conclusion in these sentences means eternal punishment, then Arminianism is true; but either the text itself, or the context and other Scriptures, prove that the punishment or chastisement threatened in case of disobedience, is temporal and corrective, and not eternal and destructive, for God gives His children eternal life, and they shall never perish, and though their voluntary sins separate them from His face, nothing present or future can ever separate them from His love (John x. 28-30, Heb. xii; Isa. lix. 2,; Rom. viii. 28-39). 

Thus the conditionality of time salvation is just as certain as the truth of the eternal word of God. Baptists have always heretofore understood it so; nearly all Baptists understand it so now; and this truth is in perfect accordance with Christian experience. And if the living child of God, having the indwelling of the Spirit of life and grace, which makes him alive, is not able to obey heartily and sincerely, though imperfectly, the commandments of his Heavenly Father, his real state does not differ from that of those who are dead in sin. Of course he can do nothing spiritual or acceptable to God except by that Spirit of grace; but that Spirit dwells. In him (John xiv. 16, 17; $oin, viii. 9-17; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph. ii. 22); and he " can do all things through Christ, who strengthens him" (Phil. iv. 13; and he well knows and loves to confess that he has nothing good which he did not receive from God, and that without Christ he can do nothing, and that by the grace of God, he is what he is—a poor, hell-deserving sinner, SAVED BY GRACE —a brand plucked from the eternal burning (1 Cor. iv. 7; James 1. 17; John xv. 5 1 Cor. xv. 10; 1 Tim. i. 15; Zech. iii. 2).  

And he knows just as well, both from the Scriptures and his own experience, that, in wilful disobedience to God, he does not enjoy that spiritual comfort which he has in obedience. All the, children of God are as assured of these truths as they are of their own existence; and bitter contention over them is wholly unnecessary, unprofitable, unwholesome, and subverting. The ENTIRE scriptural truth about any matter unites, comforts, and edifies the children of God; while a contention for a PART of the truth for the WHOLE truth divides, distresses, and overthrows them. Truth is spherical; we must look at it on all sides to understand it at all aright. Extremes are dangerous; let us avoid them as we would the verge of a fatal precipice. "Let our moderation be known unto all men—the Lord is at hand" (Phil. iv. 5).

God is the only independent and absolute Being in the universe; not for one instant does any other being cease to be, both naturally and spiritually, dependent upon Him. All our sins come from ourselves alone, and with confusion of face we must take all the shame for them, and not charge them in any way upon our holy Creator— upon His foreknowledge, or predestination, or the partial withdrawal of His Spirit of grace, for well do we know that such a blasphemous imputation would be the grossest of sins; while all our salvation from sin and its consequences comes from God, who deserves and will receive every particle of the glory of it.

While fear and hope are, in the conditional Scriptures, recognized and addressed as strong motives to human action, pure, self-denying LOVE is set forth, in the Scriptures, as the highest and strongest motive that can actuate any being; the motive which assimilates us most to the character of the Three-One God, who is Love, and who saves His people because of His eternal and infinite love of them. Without this divine motive in our hearts, our services cannot be acceptable to God, and we can never enter that "heaven above, where all is love," or, if we could enter the home of eternal love, we could not enjoy its holy delights.

Man is not an unthinking, involuntary, irresponsible machine. He can and should be moral—it will be better for him in this world; but it is far better for him to be spiritual, and to be thus prepared for heaven.

I believe that all right-minded Primitive Baptists will aceept these scriptural truths. Such acceptance would put an end to the useless and runious strife of words on this subject.	S. H.
QUESTIONS ANSWERED BY ELD. S. HASSELL

__Q.__ Do the original words translated "if" in the King James Version of the Bible have, no meaning? 

__A.__ No person but an irreverent ignoramus or monomaniac can say so. It is an awful reflection upon the Holy Spirit to say that He would inspire men to write meaningless words. The words translated "if" occur 830 times in the Old Testament and 592 times in the New Testament, or 1,422 times in the Scriptures. According to the most authoritative lexicons of the Hebrew and Greek languages, these words denote a condition or a supposition or a concession or a cause or a desire or a time. No intelligent and reverent mind can read such passages as Gen. 4: 7; Ex. 15: 26; Lev. 26: 3-4 ; Deut. 4: 29-31; 7: 12-26; 11: 13-32; Josh. 24: 20; Psalm 89: 30132; Isa. 1: 19, 20; Jer. 7: 5-7; Ezek. 18: 5-23; Matt. 6: 14, 15; John 4: 10; 7: 37; 8: 24; 12: 32; 13: 17; 14: 23; Rom. 8: 18; Gal. 5: 15, 18; 2 Pet. 1: 8, 10; and 1 John 1: 7, and say that the words therein translated "if" have no meaning.

__Q.__ Was Adam made a spiritual man, and did he die a spiritual death when he ate the forbidden fruit?

__A.__ No other man was ever like Adam, or ever had his exact experience, and we can only know of him what the Scriptures teach us. It is worse than useless to speculate as to Adam or any other subject beyond the plain teachings of the Scriptures. The truly humble soul does not desire to indulge in such speculations, or to hear or read such speculations from others. (Psa. cxxxi.; Isa. xiii. 20; Acts xvii. 11; 1 Tim. vi. 3-5; 2 Tim. iii 15-17). We know from the Scriptures that Adam was made with a body and a soul (Gen, ii.7; Eccles. xii. 7), and yet that he was made a natural man (1 Cor. xv. 45-49). Though he had a human spirit, he was not spiritual in the sense in which God's children are who are born of the Divine Spirit. And we know, from the Scriptures, that, when he ate the forbidden fruit, he died to the pleasant communion that he had before with God, became dead in trespasses and sins (Gen. ii. 17; Eph. ii. 1) and that he became subject to Divine wrath and to physical and eternal death unless saved by Divine mercy. (Gen. iii. 17, 19; Rom. v. 12, 21). Some call the death in trespasses and sins, spiritual death; if by the phrase "spiritual death" they mean death in trespasses and sins, let us bear with them, and not make our brother an offender for a mere word or expression, when he means only what the Scriptures declare. (Isa. xxix. 21).

__Q.__ What is the difference between the sovereignty, foreknowledge, and predestination of God? 

__A.__ God's sovereignty means His supreme and absolute authority and control of all persons and all events; His foreknowledge means knowledge of all things before they come to pass; and His predestination means His  determining beforehand what comes to pass—holiness causatively and efficiently, and sin permissively and overrulingly.

## THE END
